Welcome, welcome, welcome, faithful listeners and curious seekers
to The Unfolding Faith.
I'm your host, and I am absolutely thrilled
you're joining us for our very first episode.
Today, we're diving deep into a topic that
is foundational to everything we believe, the person
of Jesus Christ.
Many of us grew up with Sunday school
stories, gentle Jesus, meek and mild.
But what if there's so much more to
discover?
What if the real Jesus is more radical,
more challenging, and ultimately even more compelling than
we ever imagined?
To help us peel back those layers, I
am incredibly honored to introduce our very first
guest.
She is a brilliant mind, a respected scholar,
and someone who has dedicated her life to
understanding the scriptures.
Please welcome Dr. Evelyn Reid, a distinguished New
Testament scholar from the University of Durham.
Dr. Reid, thank you so much for being
here.
It's an absolute pleasure to be here.
Thank you for having me.
So let's just dive right in.
When you think about this idea, the Jesus
I never knew, what kind of comes to
mind first, maybe from the common oversimplifications that
we often see?
Yeah, that's a great place to start.
I think one of the biggest ones really
is this tendency to see Jesus as purely
a spiritual teacher, sort of disconnected from his
time and place.
Right, like he was just floating above it
all.
Exactly, like a gentle sage, just offering nice
spiritual thoughts, but not really engaged with the
world.
But the historical reality, the scholarship really emphasizes
this, is that he was deeply, deeply rooted
in first century Jewish life.
Under Roman occupation, that's key, isn't it?
Absolutely key.
It was a turbulent, politically charged environment.
And his teachings, they weren't just abstract.
They had, well, profound social implications, even you
could say subversive ones for the people hearing
them then.
Okay, subversive.
That definitely goes beyond gentle Jesus, meek and
mild.
Can you give us an example, something specific
from his teachings that sounds maybe familiar, but
was actually quite radical in context?
Sure.
Well, let's take the Beatitudes, from the Sermon
on the Mount in Matthew 5.
Mm-hmm, blessed are the- Right, like,
blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit
the earth, or blessed are the peacemakers, for
they shall be called children of God.
Now, we hear those and they sound, well,
lovely, very moral.
Yeah, aspirational.
Exactly.
But put yourself in that world.
Roman power is everywhere.
It's built on military might, on dominance, on
taking what you want.
And here's Jesus saying, blessed are the meek,
blessed are the peacemakers.
Well, that's incredibly countercultural.
So meek there, it didn't mean weak or
passive, like we might think today.
It was something else.
Precisely.
That's a common misunderstanding.
The Greek word, it doesn't imply spinelessness at
all.
Think more like power under control.
Humility, yes, but also a profound reliance on
God, not on your own strength or on
violence.
Ah, okay.
So it's a different kind of strength.
It really is.
It's strength found in dependence on God.
Contrast that with Rome's strength through legions and
force.
For a Jewish audience, many hoping for a
military Messiah to kick the Romans out, Jesus
saying the path to inheriting the earth, inheriting
God's kingdom is through meekness and peacemaking.
That would have been frankly baffling, maybe even
scandalous to some.
He's proposing a completely upside down kingdom compared
to the world's values.
Wow.
Okay.
That really does flip the script.
It makes you hear those familiar words very
differently.
Thinking about your own journey with this, was
there a particular moment or teaching of Jesus
that really reshaped your understanding?
Something that made you think, ah, this is
the Jesus I never knew.
Oh, definitely.
For me, and it's something that comes through
strongly in a lot of the analysis, it's
his interactions with people on the margins.
Specifically, the encounter with a Samaritan woman at
the well, John chapter four.
Okay.
The woman at the well.
Why that one particularly?
Well, you have to understand the context.
Jews and Samaritans, they despise each other.
Centuries of bad blood, religious disagreement, ethnic tension,
and women in that society, especially a Samaritan
woman and one with, let's say, a complicated
past.
She was about as low on the social
ladder as you could get.
So just talking to her was breaking rules?
Multiple rules, major social taboos.
First, he deliberately goes through Samaria, which devout
Jews often avoided.
Then he, a Jewish man, initiates a conversation
with her, a Samaritan woman alone.
That was unheard of.
And he asked her for a drink.
It would have made him- Ritually unclean,
according to the customs of the day.
Yes.
But he does it anyway, and it doesn't
stop there.
He engages her in this incredibly deep theological
conversation about worship, about living water, and then
he reveals himself to her.
He tells the Samaritan outcast that he's the
Messiah, not the religious leaders, not even his
closest disciples first in this instance, her.
That's astounding when you lay it out like
that.
It really is.
It shows his kingdom isn't about our human
categories, Jew or Samaritan, man or woman, righteous
or sinner, social standing.
None of that.
He cuts right through it all.
He sees her.
Sees the person.
Sees the person, offers her dignity, truth, and
this living water, and they kick her.
It's her testimony, this marginalized woman's word that
leads her whole village to come and hear
Jesus, and many believe because of her.
It's just a powerful illustration of radical inclusion.
He sees past the labels, past the sin,
to the person God loves.
Seeing beyond the labels, that feels incredibly relevant
for us today, doesn't it?
In a world so quick to categorize, did
this pattern of challenging the status quo, especially
the religious establishment, show up elsewhere?
Oh, constantly.
It's a major theme.
Jesus was always bumping up against the religious
authorities, not because he was anti-religion, I
don't think, but against hypocrisy, against rules that
had become more important than people, than God's
actual heart.
Right, like adding burdens to people.
Exactly.
Think about Mark 2.1 sick.
He says, It is not the healthy who
need a doctor, but the sick.
I have not come to call the righteous,
but sinners.
That must have really irritated the leaders who
saw themselves as the righteous ones.
Absolutely.
Their focus was often on maintaining purity, on
separation, on keeping things neat and tidy, clean
versus unclean.
But Jesus' focus, it was on healing, on
restoration, on reaching out to the very people
the establishment wanted to keep out, eating with
tax collectors, touching lepers, healing on the Sabbath.
These weren't just nice gestures.
They were statements.
Powerful statements.
Deliberate challenges to the system.
Showing God's compassion wasn't limited by their rules.
He was bringing wholeness where they saw only
defilement.
Okay.
So for someone listening now who maybe grew
up with that simpler picture and wants to
find this more radical, challenging, maybe more historically
real Jesus, what's a practical step?
How can they engage with the Gospels differently?
That's the crucial question, isn't it?
How do we rediscover this?
My biggest piece of advice would be read
the Gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, as if
for the first time.
Like wiping the slate clean.
Exactly.
Try to consciously set aside the flannel graph
images, the Sunday school stories, the assumptions you've
carried.
Maybe read one Gospel straight through from beginning
to end to really get its flow and
focus.
And as you read, pay really close attention.
Who does Jesus talk to?
What topics does he keep coming back to?
And maybe most importantly, how does he push
against the norms of his day?
Ask yourself, you know, how would this have
landed on a first century Jew?
Or what would a Roman soldier have thought
hearing this?
Approach it like a bit of a detective
maybe, looking for the surprising bits.
That's a great way to put it.
Be a detective.
And don't shy away from the difficult parts,
the passages that make you uncomfortable.
Often that's where the depth is.
Can you give an example of a difficult
or maybe even fierce moment?
Sure.
Think about Jesus turning over the tables in
the temple courtyard, John chapter 2.
That's not gentle Jesus, meek and mild.
That's fiercely prophetic.
It's an act of righteous anger against exploiting
the poor and corrupting worship.
Right.
That's a powerful image.
Or even his rebuke of Peter.
His closest disciple says something trying to divert
him from his path.
And Jesus says, get behind me, Satan.
Matthew 16.
That's intense.
Yeah.
Not something you usually see on a greeting
card.
Definitely not.
But these moments, they show a Jesus who
is fully human, feeling real emotions like anger
and frustration, but also fully divine, utterly committed
to his mission, even when it was incredibly
hard, even when it led to confrontation and
ultimately to the cross.
It's a much richer, more complex and honestly
more compelling picture than just the simplified version.
He's active, purposeful, challenging.
Dr. Reed, this has been an incredibly enlightening
conversation.
We've just scratched the surface, but you've already
given us so much to think about and
to explore further.
Thank you for helping us begin to discover
the Jesus beyond the familiar stories.
My pleasure.
It's a journey worth taking.
And for all of you listening, I hope
this conversation has sparked a new curiosity, a
desire to dig deeper into the gospels and
encounter the Jesus who is truly transformative.
Join us next time on The Unfolding Faith
as we continue to explore what it means
to believe in this rapidly changing world.